---
date: '2022-4-16'
title: 'Dire RPG Design Goal #1: Reduce the Importance of Luck'
excerpt: 'Clarifying my first design goal when building out Dire RPG.'
categories:
  - 'TTRPG'
  - 'Game Design'
  - 'Dire RPG'
# updated:
---

Every TTRPG system that I have come across, and for that matter almost every game regardless of medium, has an element of both luck and skill when it comes to determining outcomes.  If you are swinging a sword in attempts to hit your enemy, if you casting a complex spell while bouncing on the back of a running horse, or if you are picking a complex lock while trying not to break your picks, there will always be an element of luck and character skill to consider.  In most games, luck plays a larger role in these decisions than I would like it to.  Characters that are built around performing a particular task extremely well will have to pray to lady luck for good rolls more than I would like them to.  To give a concrete example let's look at a basic combat scenario in the popular Dungeons and Dragons 5.0: the most basic combat situation between a min-maxed fighter and a kobold.  

In this scenario, will will have a level 1 fighter who took the military background and the maximum allowed strength of 20.  This fighter (let's call him Max) is the person who was practicing the blade while his friends were off having a childhood.  Instead of picking up sports and chasing girls in his village, he was always found in the training yard practicing the blade and lifting weights as much as possible.  As soon as he was able, Max enrolled in the military where he fought in the Red Dawn War along side his knight.  After witnessing his death and the way the King didn't give a rats ass about his closest brother in arms, he joined the adventurer's guild to use his talents where they would be appreciated.  With the standard issued longsword, Max will have +7 to hit and deal 1d6+7 damage.  

Meanwhile, there is a small creature wondering the countryside looking for a fight.  This battle worn creature has seen many humans come and go from his village, pillaging his home and killing his family.  As the last remaining member of his clan Koh the Bold, a kobold, has sword to exact revenge on any human that he comes across.  He knows that this is probably a suicidal thing to do, but he knows deep down that this is how he wishes to live out his remaining few days.  While adventuring, he comes across a sleeping human and is able to kill him before he wakes.  In his excitement of his first victory, he claims the victims bloody studded leather coat as his own and takes his battered wooden shield as a prize.  Koh the Bold now has an armor class of 16.  

Later, both Max and Koh find each other while adventuring.  Max confidently walks up and challenges the raging little creature that thinks he can take him on, and swings at him with the sword he's been practicing with for the past 10 years of his life.  The DM asks Max to roll to hit, and he rolls an 8.  Max misses, and Koh becomes a little bolder.  

While a roll of 8 doesn't seem very high, I still believe this scenario should not have played out this way.  After all, Max has a 40% chance to miss one of the weakest enemies in the game.  He has a 50% chance to miss Animated Armor, and a 55% chance to miss a Goblin Boss (challenge rating 1).  What's even worse is that this situation only improves by 5% by level 8, not including magical equipment or the extra attack he would get.  To me, someone who lives and breaths the blade should not struggle to even hit basic enemies.  Combat also sees the greatest bonuses in character creation.  Picking a lock with a DC of 20+ becomes even more of a challenge for the thief than fighting does for the fighter.  While luck does make many situations interesting, I don't feel that it should have the power it does in a system like this. 

My system aims to remove the influence of luck in many ways.  Rolls are based on a single d10, and players have a skill level between 1 and 10.  This is a classless system, so if a character wants to dump all their experience into a single skill in order to not fail when using it (aka, master the blade), then they are able to do so at the expense of being good in other areas.  A player using a skill must roll equal to or under their skill level in order to not fail, so a character has complete control of how likely they are to fail a particular action.  The character choosing what they train on determines their success rate, not their class or their equipment.  Give control to the players, not the leather jacket!  